chila coffee. So we had corn plots tests growing at
all these locations and we'd send them the seed to
plant and then go around in the fall and take notes
on the crop and evaluate the hybrids so that we had
different hybrids for different environmental
areas. And the one thing that has always been a
tremendous importance to me and a value is the
contacts I had with the superintendents at these
different stations. They were really a
tremendous group of people, diverse as could be,
but everyone was likable, and they were effective
people and committed to their work, and they just
loved what they were doing. I've mentioned a few
names. There was Bill Friend at Wesley Cole. I
can't remember all the initials. Hall at
Beeville, Stansel at Angleton, Henry Hill at
Temple, Johnson at Tyler, Shorty Morris at
Nacogdoches, Roy Quimby, who you've probably
heard of, at Chillicothe, and a fellow named Don
Jones out at Lubbock. I think these people
deserve, these leaders in the different areas
deserve a tremendous amount of credit for what
they've done. efforts like the corn project, did
they have plots at many of the stations using the
new, hopefully the new varieties of corn? That's
correct, yes. We would carry out what we'd call a
breeding function. We'd develop the lines and
make the experimental crosses and then send a
series of crosses to each of these locations. And
then they'd harvest the plots in the fall. And we'd
go around there and take notes on them, make
observations, and make selections of the best
hybrids. So they played an integral role in, in
this case, the development of hybrid corn. But of
course, they were carrying on other activities
that related to their particular area. For
example, in the valley, they'd be working with
vegetables and fruits a lot.
on this particular project. When did y'all begin
to think that you were making some progress? How
many years did it take? Well, I'd say that Dr.
Mangelsdorf started in the development in the
early 30s. And we were beginning to have the first
few hybrids introduced in 41, 42, and
just improved from then on. We introduced, oh, I'd
say half a dozen hybrids during the early war
years, and I was gone during 45 and back in 46. And we
then had additional and improved, I'd say a second
group of hybrids came along in the late 40s as a
result of this joint program all around the state.
So it was a... an interesting time in this
particular project area. What was your response
as a typical Texas farmer to these new varieties?
They were generally eager to accept them, yes. We
were obtaining yield increases of I'd say 15 to 30
percent. Of course, one of the reactions, they
didn't like to pay the higher price for the seed.
which they'd been accustomed to harvesting their
crop and just replanting, usually, and having a
seed cost. I've forgotten now what the cost is, but
you end up costing a few dollars an acre for the
hybrid seed. In that era, Texas corn was usually
fed to the animals locally? A lot of it was, yes.
Just over a period of time, changed somewhat from
being used on the farm where it was grown to being
collected in elevators and maybe fed locally by
feeders locally. And by now, I'd say some of it goes
clear up to the feedlots. And what also happened
over a period of time, and this gets on up into the
50s and 60s, the corn acres declined dramatically
But the yield went up so that today we have, instead
of five million acres, we have two million. But the
average yield is over 100 bushels an acre. So we're
actually, I figured this out, producing more corn
probably than we did in 1940. And you
said 15 bushels maybe with the old corn? The
average yield per acre. 15 to 100. Yes, that's
correct. It's a little over 100, very little, 110
or so, but we'd be producing more now on the 2
million acres by quite a bit than we were on the 5
million in 1940, and that's just an indication of
one improvement in agriculture and what's
happened overall with the improvement in seeds,
fertilizers, herbicides, insecticides and all
that. You're a full-time member of the Experiment
Station staff, working full-time on the corn
project. Correct. Up to the war. Then you go away,
active duty. I was gone just during 1945. Then you
come back. Take the story from there and go
forward. All right. I came back, started back at
the Experiment Station beginning in 1946. And...
I went off to graduate school in summer of 46. I
wanted to get a Ph.D. degree if I wanted to stay in
this type of work because, as you're familiar
with, you're somewhat restricted in advancement
without a Ph.D. degree in an institution like A&M
or any of the other major institutions. So I went to
school again with Dr. Manglethorpe, who was at
Harvard. and finally finished. I stayed up there
about a year and a half taking courses and did some
thesis work back here in Texas, 48 and 49, and
finally obtained a Ph.D. degree in 1949 from
Harvard. You were probably a rarity at A&M then.
There probably weren't many Harvard students
here. I really don't know. I never thought to
explore that. Did you retain during those
graduate study days, did you retain your
position? Yes, I was on leave and was able to go
through a general education board fellowship. I
don't know whether you've run across those
anywhere else or not, but it's a tremendous
program, the Rockefeller Foundation. When you
come back, how did your routine change? Well,
there's one story that I guess I would say is a
highlight of my career, if you want to call it that,
or corn improvement generally in relation to the
production of hybrid corn. In 1944,
before I went away into service shortly before. I
noticed a plant that was what we call male sterile.
The silks represent the female part and the
tassels the male part. And the tassel was sterile.
It had branches but didn't exude any anthrax or
anything. And I'd remembered talking to Dr.
Mangerthorff about sterile tassels. back some
years before when he was still here. And he had
talked about the possibility of using such a corn
to produce hybrid corn without detasseling.
Don't want to go into detail, but to produce hybrid
corn, you have to detassel one parent and let the
other one shed pollen to produce the hybrid, which
is a timely and time-consuming and costly
operation.
Anything to be done to alleviate that would be a big
improvement. Well, we found this one plant in the
greenhouse and made some crosses with it and kind
of lost track of it while I was in the service, but I
returned and started back making continued
crosses with it and the plants retained their
sterility, which meant that it was
cytoplasmically or maternally inherited.
The male sterile character was transmitted by the
seed parent each time and stayed sterile.
In 19, after I came back from service, I guess it was
right before I went to graduate school, in making
some crosses with this sterile corn, male sterile
corn, crossed with some different lines,
different inbreds, and one of them showed up
fertile, which meant that here was a line that was
capable of restoring fertility to this sterile
form. This is a fantastic
situation if it would really work out, and it did. I
don't know the time span exactly, but... When I got
back from Harvard, we pursued it pretty rapidly
and built up the quantities of the sterile corn in
appropriate lines so that it could be used as a seed
parent for producing hybrids and you wouldn't
have to detassel it. It wouldn't shed any power.
But you had to use then the restore lines and the
pollinator so that you'd restore fertility for
the next generation so the farmer wouldn't have a
crop of cobs. There was a kind of an interim
solution to this, too, though. For a while, some of
the companies were producing, say, two-thirds of
their crop on sterile and a third on the tasseled
corn, which would be fertile, and then blending
the two so that you'd get enough pollen in the
farmer's field to produce seed, produce grain.
But if you got the restorers in there, you didn't
have to do any blending either. And I don't
remember. This
development really exploded once it got out into
the industry because it was such a fantastic
saving. And along there in the late 40s, early 50s
was I don't know what the proportions were, but a
tremendous amount of seed acreage planted
through this sterile restore system. It really
had a dramatic effect on the industry. In the
success of this long program, are there any
individuals that deserve special credit?
the people that gave Project Wheel support? Any
governors or members of the legislature, A&M
administrators? Well, of course, the Experiment
Station administrators.
And Tom Harrington, I believe, was president or
chancellor along in there. And there's a write-up
in one of the annual reports. I don't remember why
Tom was here. There's
another element of the story here. But yes, I'd say
there was support in the institution for it. And
yes, the Department of Agriculture was
supporting part of the research. And they were
quite excited about the development, and
particularly the director of the experimental
state. He was R.D. Lewis. Did you know him? Yeah. He
was very supportive of it and was, of course, able
to see that it went ahead.
Let me just finish this male sterile story while
I'm on it. It goes ahead time-wise. So during the
50s, the industry just moved to this sterile
restore system of production. And you asked about
the credit. that somewhere in the 50s, I believe it
was the mid-50s, a lawsuit instituted. Have you
ever heard any of this? I didn't know that it was
published at the university about it off and on in
the past. A lawsuit instituted by Research
Corporation of America. I believe that's the name
of it. I don't know the Research Corporation. It's
the Rockefeller. subsidiary
or something they'd founded. And Mangelsdorf and
Jones, I didn't tell you, Jones was a corn breeder
in Connecticut at the Experiment Station in
Connecticut. He had worked with Mangelsdorf. And
they had talked about this procedure for some
time. So they...
started a lawsuit against the industry for using
the system without paying royalties for it to
them. And this hassle went on for a period of
several years. And I gave,
oh, what do you call it? Give a legal report out of
court. I can't think of the name of it right now.
Deposition.
Deposition. And then we were in court a time or two.
I think the case was tried in Chicago in the
mid-60s. Well, the upshot of it was that the
Research Corporation won. The industry was
alive. responsible for making the payment to him.
I was in some awkward condition, position, since I
had done the developmental activity of it,
actually. And Jones, and the minor folks, to some
extent, thought up the idea and all this and that.
So it was a question, I guess, of who deserved
credit Anyway, they won the lawsuit, and the
industry had to pay royalty. But they just had to
pay them during the last years the patent was
available, and they would almost run out by the
time they finished the lawsuit. So the industry
paid some money. I don't remember how much. It was a
significant amount. It would have been in the
millions of dollars, I'm sure. But then in either
1970 or 1971,
We had a tremendous blight take over the corn crop
in the United States, and it was a big national
story. I don't know whether you had to bed in a cave
and run into it or not. But the corn crop was reduced
by a third or two thirds of a tremendous production
due to the blight, and the blight was related to
this male sterile character. The male stericorn
blighted and the non-male stericorn didn't. So
all of a sudden, here was all this seed and
inventory that was blight-susceptible, and of
course nobody wanted to plant it. So there was a
rapid change in the industry from the sterile form
back to the normal form where you do tassels. And it
was just all kind of hullabaloo in 71 about that.
And everybody's scrambling. I was in the seed
business then, scrambling around to get
non-sterile corn. And since then, it hadn't been
used much. There has been another form or two that
are used to some extent, forms that are not
susceptible to the blight. But anyway, the story
went on from the mid-40s to the 70s. And did you stay
with corn during all those years? Yes, primarily.
Well, maybe I better go back to when I came back from
my graduate work, finished in 1949, and then I went
back, continued my job. I was just on leave and
continued working in charge of the corn
improvement program. But in 1956, I became head of
the Department of Agronomy. and didn't really
have time to do any work anymore. But I didn't last
very long, only a couple years. I came here in 56 and
resigned in 58.
Describe the Department of Agronomy at that time
in terms of its number of faculty and who were its
key people and so forth. All right. Let me back up
just a little. I think I mentioned earlier that the
Experiment Station and the Agricultural
Extension Service were separate from the College
of Agriculture. And in 1946, at
the recommendation of the committee that had
studied the subject, they combined those three
agencies under a chancellor of agriculture, I
believe. It affected the department
tremendously because there was a teaching
department of agronomy, a research department of
agronomy, and there wasn't literally an
extension department of agronomy, but there were
agronomists in the extension service. So these
three branches were all put together in one
department as part of the agricultural system.
That happened in 46, 47. So when I became
department head in 40, excuse me, 56, a man by the
name of Dr. Adams had been department head from 46
to 56, implementing this coordinated department
effort. And that was pretty well established at
the time. I became head in 56. I'm going to guess we
had 30 or 40 staff members in agronomy locally
here. Who were the most nationally known
members? In the department? Okay.
I'm more familiar with the people in the plant
science area than I am in soil science. Agronomy
covers both. and subjects. T.R. Richmond was the
cotton leader, and he was well-known nationally.
I.M. Atkins was the small grain leader, and both of
them were well-known nationally and
internationally. Now, some of the agronomists
that weren't literally in the department here,
but they were located at these substations I
mentioned, and they could be considered, I guess,
agronomists. They were part of the system anyway.
Hank Beechel, whom you may have heard of as a rice
breeder at Beaumont, and he became world, he's a
Borlaug type now. World-renowned rice breeder,
and spent some years in the Philippines, He did
some part of the Green Revolution work. He's 93
years old now, I think, and still gets out in the
fields and lives down here at Alvin, I believe.
Atkins, as you say, was the wheat breeder. But J.R.
Quindy, who you've heard of, I think, he's gotten
several awards around the state. The nation was
internationally known as the Sardine Authority.
A man named Kenny Porter was also in small grains.
He was located out of Amarillo at the experiment
station there. And in the soils program, probably
J.D. Page was widely known. Do you know him? He was a
soil physicist. Adams
himself was head during the 50s. There was
well-known soil fertility work.
A couple of fellows, Fisher and Caldwell in soil
chemistry.
Frank Fudge was a soil chemist who had been
stationed for a number of years in the department.
During that era, was almost all of the research
funding from appropriated state and federal
money? Was there much private money supporting
research? No, there was not much private money.
And I don't know just what the balance would be
between state and federal, but there was a lot of
federal money in supporting programs. The
Bankhead Jones Act provided funds. I've
forgotten the name of the other one. And annually,
we'd have inspectors come down from the US
Department of Agriculture and review the
projects and make recommendations. But there was
very little private money. In the corn project, we
did have some industry funding.
The industry itself provided. certain funding on
a percentage basis on sales and marketing of
hybrid corn. It was, oh, at that time,
substantial. About $50,000, $100,000 annually.
When you became department head, who was the dean?
Whom did you report as department head? That was
the first thing President Rutter asked me when I
resigned, who I reported to, and I never was quite
sure. The administration of the land-grant
system is complex
and even questionable, I could say. Anyway, the
department heads had three bosses, the director
of extension, Director of the Experiment
Station, and the Dean of the College of
Agriculture.
John Hutchinson was Director of the Extension
Service. Artie Lewis was Director of the
Experiment Station. No, not
just yet. I'm trying to sort out the dean
situation. Dean
Shepardson was dean of agriculture, the teaching
part during the 50s, and he was appointed to the
Federal Reserve Board, I believe, and left. Dr.
Adams, who was head of agronomy, became dean of
agriculture, and he didn't stay but a year or two,
and his fruit basket turned over there for a few
years. He went off to Nevada, and I believe Jack
Miller became dean after that, and he'd already
gotten there because he left for Oregon.
I
didn't mean that as a total answer.
Well, John Hutcherson,
well, I shouldn't say he was one of the good old
boys, exactly, but you just dealt with him like you
would the fellow next door or anything. He
encouraged you and supported you. I'd say took a
positive outlook on the projects, activities,
and tried to lead by example. Of course, I knew him
personally pretty well. But I think he followed
that general procedure with the individuals who
reported to him. And I would judge he's a very
successful administrator. He stayed in that job.
for 20 years.
Dr. Lewis was not so much that way. He was
demanding in some ways.
But he would recognize
merit in activities and was I'd certainly say
personally, very supportive. We just went about
it in a different way, though. At least that's my
recollection. And for you as department head, is
it difficult to report to three different places?
Well, administratively, it's somewhat
confusing, yes. Oh, I was going to tell you about
President Ruggs. I was just in this job two years.
And I think Jack Miller was the dean I remember. He
left about the same time I did.
But we had a vice chancellor of agriculture also in
the picture. And that was D.W. Williams at that
time. And he was the one who called me up and offered
me the job. not these other people. So you just
missed an echelon there. So when I resigned, I
wrote him a letter. He hired me. I'm sure I sent
copies to the deans and directors. But I got a phone
call the next day from Rudder and said, I want you to
come over to my office. I don't think I'd met him. He
had just started, I believe, maybe just a few
months, as a president, a few months before, said,
what did you write the chancellor for to resign?
Why didn't you write to the dean? You report to the
dean. Well, Mr. President, whatever I called him,
he was the fellow who hired me, and so I thought it
was appropriate to send him a letter about my
employment or anything to resign. And I bet he
talked to me 10 or 15 minutes or maybe 30, a good
while for a president to spend time with, I
thought. And I think it had some effect on some of
his thinking later, maybe, because they did some
things, I think, to kind of straighten the
administration out so that at least they all were
on the same page.
I surely got the impression he felt like the dean
was the one that he should report to.
No, I resigned. I went in the industry.
Right. As you look back on your career at A&M and
your students there this year,
What
did being an Aggie mean? What did it mean to you in
your life when you
came up here and studied and so forth? Well, there
is to me, I think I've talked earlier about the core
involvement and not to the extent that I think it
had an effect on me, but I value greatly the core
experience, even though it was just for the two
years. Living under those conditions and the
associations you develop.